README.md, before:

# 🔭 EOSC Data Commons MCP server

[![Build](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/data-commons-mcp/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/data-commons-mcp/actions/workflows/build.yml) 
[![Docker image](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-ghcr.io-blue.svg?logo=docker)](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/data-commons-mcp/pkgs/container/data-commons-mcp)
[![PyPI - Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/data-commons-mcp.svg?logo=pypi&label=PyPI&logoColor=silver)](https://pypi.org/project/data-commons-mcp/)
[![PyPI - Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/data-commons-mcp.svg?logo=python&label=Python&logoColor=silver)](https://pypi.org/project/data-commons-mcp/)

A [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/) server exposing an HTTP POST endpoint to access data from various open-access data publishers, developed for the [EOSC Data Commons project](https://eosc.eu/horizon-europe-projects/eosc-data-commons/).

It uses a search API, and a Large Language Model (LLM) to help users find the datasets and tools they need.

## 🧩 Endpoints

The HTTP API comprises 2 main endpoints:

- `/mcp`: **MCP server** that searches for relevant data to answer a user question using the EOSC Data Commons OpenSearch service
  - Uses Streamable HTTP transport
  - Available tools:
    - [x] Search datasets
    - [ ] Search tools
    - [ ] Search citations related to datasets or tools
    - [ ] Search more details about a dataset content (files metadata)
  
- `/chat`: **HTTP POST** endpoint (JSON) for chatting with the MCP server tools via an LLM provider (API key provided through env variable at deployment)
  - Streams Server-Sent Events (SSE) response complying with the [AG-UI protocol](https://ag-ui.com).

> [!TIP]
>
> It can also be used just as a MCP server through the pip package.

## 🔌 Connect client to MCP server

The system can be used directly as a MCP server using either STDIO, or Streamable HTTP transport.

> [!WARNING]
>
> You will need access to a pre-indexed OpenSearch instance for the MCP server to work.

Follow the instructions of your client, and use the `/mcp` URL of your deployed server (e.g. http://localhost:8000/mcp)

To add a new MCP server to **VSCode GitHub Copilot**:

- Open the Command Palette (`ctrl+shift+p` or `cmd+shift+p`)
- Search for `MCP: Add Server...`
- Choose `HTTP`, and provide the MCP server URL http://localhost:8000/mcp

Your VSCode `mcp.json` should look like:

```json
{
    "servers": {
        "data-commons-mcp-http": {
            "url": "http://localhost:8000/mcp",
            "type": "http"
        }
    },
    "inputs": []
}
```

Or with STDIO transport:

```json
{
   "servers": {
      "data-commons-mcp": {
         "type": "stdio",
         "command": "uvx",
         "args": ["data-commons-mcp"],
         "env": {
            "OPENSEARCH_URL": "OPENSEARCH_URL"
         }
      }
   }
}
```

Or using local folder for development:

```json
{
   "servers": {
      "data-commons-mcp": {
         "type": "stdio",
         "cwd": "~/dev/data-commons-mcp",
         "env": {
            "OPENSEARCH_URL": "OPENSEARCH_URL"
         },
         "command": "uv",
         "args": ["run", "data-commons-mcp"]
      }
   }
}
```

## 🛠️ Development

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Requirements:
>
> - [x] [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/), to easily handle scripts and virtual environments
> - [x] docker, to deploy the OpenSearch service (or just access to a running instance)
> - [x] API key for a LLM provider: [e-infra CZ](https://chat.ai.e-infra.cz/), [Mistral.ai](https://console.mistral.ai/api-keys), or [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/)
>

### 📥 Install dev dependencies

```sh
uv sync --extra agent
```

Install pre-commit hooks:

```sh
uv run pre-commit install
```

Create a `keys.env` file with your LLM provider API key(s):

```sh
EINFRACZ_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
MISTRAL_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
```

### ⚡️ Start dev server

Start the server in dev at http://localhost:8000, with MCP endpoint at http://localhost:8000/mcp

```sh
uv run uvicorn src.data_commons_mcp.main:app
```

> Default `OPENSEARCH_URL=http://localhost:9200`

Customize server configuration through environment variables:

```sh
SERVER_PORT=8001 OPENSEARCH_URL=http://localhost:9200 uv run uvicorn src.data_commons_mcp.main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8001 --reload
```

> [!TIP]
>
> Example `curl` request:
>
> ```sh
> curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/chat \
> 	-H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "Authorization: SECRET_KEY" \
> 	-d '{"messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Educational datasets from Switzerland covering student assessments, language competencies, and learning outcomes, including experimental or longitudinal studies on pupils or students."}], "model": "einfracz/qwen3-coder"}'
> ```
> 
> Recommended model per supported provider:
>
> - `einfracz/qwen3-coder` or `einfracz/gpt-oss-120b` (smaller, faster)
>- `mistralai/mistral-medium-latest` (large is older, and not as good with tool calls)
> - `groq/moonshotai/kimi-k2-instruct`
> - `openai/gpt-4.1`

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> To build and integrate the frontend web app to the server, from the [frontend folder](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/eoscdcpoc) run:
>
> ```sh
> npm run build && rm -rf ../data-commons-mcp/src/data_commons_mcp/webapp/ && cp -R dist/spa/ ../data-commons-mcp/src/data_commons_mcp/webapp/
> ```
>

### 📦 Build for production

Build binary in `dist/`

```sh
uv build
```

### 🐳 Deploy with Docker

Create a `keys.env` file with the API keys:

```sh
EINFRACZ_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
MISTRAL_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
SEARCH_API_KEY=SECRET_KEY_YOU_CAN_USE_IN_FRONTEND_TO_AVOID_SPAM
```

> [!TIP]
>
> `SEARCH_API_KEY` can be used to add a layer of protection against bots that might spam the LLM, if not provided no API key will be needed to query the API.

You can use the prebuilt docker image [`ghcr.io/eosc-data-commons/data-commons-mcp:main`](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/data-commons-mcp/pkgs/container/data-commons-mcp)

Example `compose.yml`:

```yaml
services:
  mcp:
    image: ghcr.io/eosc-data-commons/data-commons-mcp:main
    ports:
      - "127.0.0.1:8000:8000"
    environment:
      OPENSEARCH_URL: "http://opensearch:9200"
      EINFRACZ_API_KEY: "${EINFRACZ_API_KEY}"
```

Build and deploy the service:

```sh
docker compose up
```

### ✅ Run tests

```bash
uv run pytest
```

To display all logs when debugging:

```bash
uv run pytest -s
```

### 🧹 Format code and type check

```bash
uvx ruff format
uvx ruff check --fix
uv run mypy
```

### ♻️ Reset the environment

Upgrade `uv`:

```sh
uv self update
```

Clean `uv` cache:

```sh
uv cache clean
```

### 🏷️ Release process

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Get a PyPI API token at [pypi.org/manage/account](https://pypi.org/manage/account).

Run the release script providing the version bump: `fix`, `minor`, or `major`

```sh
.github/release.sh fix
```

> [!TIP]
>
> Add your PyPI token to your environment, e.g. in `~/.zshrc` or `~/.bashrc`:
>
> ```sh
> export UV_PUBLISH_TOKEN=YOUR_TOKEN
> ```

Commit message:

feat: add date in system prompt, log token usage, improve logging

README.md, after:

# 🔭 EOSC Data Commons MCP server

[![Build](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/data-commons-mcp/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/data-commons-mcp/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![Docker image](https://img.shields.io/badge/docker-ghcr.io-blue.svg?logo=docker)](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/data-commons-mcp/pkgs/container/data-commons-mcp)
[![PyPI - Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/data-commons-mcp.svg?logo=pypi&label=PyPI&logoColor=silver)](https://pypi.org/project/data-commons-mcp/)
[![PyPI - Python Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/data-commons-mcp.svg?logo=python&label=Python&logoColor=silver)](https://pypi.org/project/data-commons-mcp/)

A [Model Context Protocol (MCP)](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/) server exposing an HTTP POST endpoint to access data from various open-access data publishers, developed for the [EOSC Data Commons project](https://eosc.eu/horizon-europe-projects/eosc-data-commons/).

It uses a search API, and a Large Language Model (LLM) to help users find the datasets and tools they need.

## 🧩 Endpoints

The HTTP API comprises 2 main endpoints:

- `/mcp`: **MCP server** that searches for relevant data to answer a user question using the EOSC Data Commons OpenSearch service
  - Uses Streamable HTTP transport
  - Available tools:
    - [x] Search datasets
    - [ ] Search tools
    - [ ] Search citations related to datasets or tools
    - [ ] Search more details about a dataset content (files metadata)

- `/chat`: **HTTP POST** endpoint (JSON) for chatting with the MCP server tools via an LLM provider (API key provided through env variable at deployment)
  - Streams Server-Sent Events (SSE) response complying with the [AG-UI protocol](https://ag-ui.com).

> [!TIP]
>
> It can also be used just as a MCP server through the pip package.

## 🔌 Connect client to MCP server

The system can be used directly as a MCP server using either STDIO, or Streamable HTTP transport.

> [!WARNING]
>
> You will need access to a pre-indexed OpenSearch instance for the MCP server to work.

Follow the instructions of your client, and use the `/mcp` URL of your deployed server (e.g. http://localhost:8000/mcp)

To add a new MCP server to **VSCode GitHub Copilot**:

- Open the Command Palette (`ctrl+shift+p` or `cmd+shift+p`)
- Search for `MCP: Add Server...`
- Choose `HTTP`, and provide the MCP server URL http://localhost:8000/mcp

Your VSCode `mcp.json` should look like:

```json
{
    "servers": {
        "data-commons-mcp-http": {
            "url": "http://localhost:8000/mcp",
            "type": "http"
        }
    },
    "inputs": []
}
```

Or with STDIO transport:

```json
{
   "servers": {
      "data-commons-mcp": {
         "type": "stdio",
         "command": "uvx",
         "args": ["data-commons-mcp"],
         "env": {
            "OPENSEARCH_URL": "OPENSEARCH_URL"
         }
      }
   }
}
```

Or using local folder for development:

```json
{
   "servers": {
      "data-commons-mcp": {
         "type": "stdio",
         "cwd": "~/dev/data-commons-mcp",
         "env": {
            "OPENSEARCH_URL": "OPENSEARCH_URL"
         },
         "command": "uv",
         "args": ["run", "data-commons-mcp"]
      }
   }
}
```

## 🛠️ Development

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Requirements:
>
> - [x] [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/), to easily handle scripts and virtual environments
> - [x] docker, to deploy the OpenSearch service (or just access to a running instance)
> - [x] API key for a LLM provider: [e-infra CZ](https://chat.ai.e-infra.cz/), [Mistral.ai](https://console.mistral.ai/api-keys), or [OpenRouter](https://openrouter.ai/)
>

### 📥 Install dev dependencies

```sh
uv sync --extra agent
```

Install pre-commit hooks:

```sh
uv run pre-commit install
```

Create a `keys.env` file with your LLM provider API key(s):

```sh
EINFRACZ_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
MISTRAL_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
```

### ⚡️ Start dev server

Start the server in dev at http://localhost:8000, with MCP endpoint at http://localhost:8000/mcp

```sh
uv run uvicorn src.data_commons_mcp.main:app --log-config logging.yml --reload
```

> Default `OPENSEARCH_URL=http://localhost:9200`

Customize server configuration through environment variables:

```sh
SERVER_PORT=8001 OPENSEARCH_URL=http://localhost:9200 uv run uvicorn src.data_commons_mcp.main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8001 --log-config logging.yml --reload
```

> [!TIP]
>
> Example `curl` request:
>
> ```sh
> curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/chat \
> 	-H "Content-Type: application/json" -H "Authorization: SECRET_KEY" \
> 	-d '{"messages": [{"role": "user", "content": "Educational datasets from Switzerland covering student assessments, language competencies, and learning outcomes, including experimental or longitudinal studies on pupils or students."}], "model": "einfracz/qwen3-coder"}'
> ```
>
> Recommended model per supported provider:
>
> - `einfracz/qwen3-coder` or `einfracz/gpt-oss-120b` (smaller, faster)
>- `mistralai/mistral-medium-latest` (large is older, and not as good with tool calls)
> - `groq/moonshotai/kimi-k2-instruct`
> - `openai/gpt-4.1`

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> To build and integrate the frontend web app to the server, from the [frontend folder](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/eoscdcpoc) run:
>
> ```sh
> npm run build && rm -rf ../data-commons-mcp/src/data_commons_mcp/webapp/ && cp -R dist/spa/ ../data-commons-mcp/src/data_commons_mcp/webapp/
> ```
>

### 📦 Build for production

Build binary in `dist/`

```sh
uv build
```

### 🐳 Deploy with Docker

Create a `keys.env` file with the API keys:

```sh
EINFRACZ_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
MISTRAL_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=YOUR_API_KEY
SEARCH_API_KEY=SECRET_KEY_YOU_CAN_USE_IN_FRONTEND_TO_AVOID_SPAM
```

> [!TIP]
>
> `SEARCH_API_KEY` can be used to add a layer of protection against bots that might spam the LLM, if not provided no API key will be needed to query the API.

You can use the prebuilt docker image [`ghcr.io/eosc-data-commons/data-commons-mcp:main`](https://github.com/EOSC-Data-Commons/data-commons-mcp/pkgs/container/data-commons-mcp)

Example `compose.yml`:

```yaml
services:
  mcp:
    image: ghcr.io/eosc-data-commons/data-commons-mcp:main
    ports:
      - "127.0.0.1:8000:8000"
    environment:
      OPENSEARCH_URL: "http://opensearch:9200"
      EINFRACZ_API_KEY: "${EINFRACZ_API_KEY}"
```

Build and deploy the service:

```sh
docker compose up
```

### ✅ Run tests

```bash
uv run pytest
```

To display all logs when debugging:

```bash
uv run pytest -s
```

### 🧹 Format code and type check

```bash
uvx ruff format
uvx ruff check --fix
uv run mypy
```

### ♻️ Reset the environment

Upgrade `uv`:

```sh
uv self update
```

Clean `uv` cache:

```sh
uv cache clean
```

### 🏷️ Release process

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> Get a PyPI API token at [pypi.org/manage/account](https://pypi.org/manage/account).

Run the release script providing the version bump: `fix`, `minor`, or `major`

```sh
.github/release.sh fix
```

> [!TIP]
>
> Add your PyPI token to your environment, e.g. in `~/.zshrc` or `~/.bashrc`:
>
> ```sh
> export UV_PUBLISH_TOKEN=YOUR_TOKEN
> ```

## 🤝 Acknowledments

The LLM provider `einfracz` is a service provided by e-INFRA CZ and operated by CERIT-SC Masaryk University

Computational resources were provided by the e-INFRA CZ project (ID:90254), supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic.
